# Published Scientific Works

### [Accelerating galaxy dynamical modeling using a neural network for joint lensing and kinematics analyses](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023arXiv230710381G/abstract)

**Gomer, Matthew R.**; Ertl, Sebastian; Biggio, Luca; Wang, Han; Galan, Aymeric; Van de Vyvere, Lyne; Sluse, Dominique; Vernardos, Georgios; Suyu, Sherry H., 2023

Strong gravitational lensing is a powerful tool to provide constraints on galaxy mass distributions and cosmological parameters, such as the Hubble constant,  H<sub>0</sub>. Nevertheless, inference of such parameters from images of lensing systems is not trivial as parameter degeneracies can limit the precision in the measured lens mass and cosmological results. External information on the mass of the lens, in the form of kinematic measurements, is needed to ensure a precise and unbiased inference. Traditionally, such kinematic information has been included in the inference after the image modeling, using spherical Jeans approximations to match the measured velocity dispersion integrated within an aperture. However, as spatially resolved kinematic measurements become available via IFU data, more sophisticated dynamical modeling is necessary. Such kinematic modeling is expensive, and constitutes a computational bottleneck which we aim to overcome with our Stellar Kinematics Neural Network (SKiNN). SKiNN emulates axisymmetric modeling using a neural network, quickly synthesizing from a given mass model a kinematic map which can be compared to the observations to evaluate a likelihood. With a joint lensing plus kinematic framework, this likelihood constrains the mass model at the same time as the imaging data. We show that SKiNN's emulation of a kinematic map is accurate to considerably better precision than can be measured (better than  1% in almost all cases). Using SKiNN speeds up the likelihood evaluation by a factor of  ∼200. This speedup makes dynamical modeling economical, and enables lens modelers to make effective use of modern data quality in the JWST era.

### [The ellipticity parameterization for an NFW profile: an overlooked angular structure in strong lens modeling](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03077)

**Gomer, Matthew R.**; Sluse, Dominique; Van de Vyvere, Lyne; Birrer, Simon; Shajib, Anowar J.; Courbin, Frederic, 2023

Galaxy-scale gravitational lenses are often modeled with two-component mass profiles where one component represents the stellar mass and the second is an NFW profile representing the dark matter. Outside of the spherical case, the NFW profile is costly to implement, and so it is approximated via two different methods; ellipticity can be introduced via the lensing potential (NFWp) or via the mass by approximating the NFW profile as a sum of analytical profiles (NFWm). While the NFWp method has been the default for lensing applications, it gives a different prescription of the azimuthal structure, which we show introduces ubiquitous gradients in ellipticity and boxiness in the mass distribution rather than having a constant elliptical shape. Because unmodeled azimuthal structure has been shown to be able to bias lens model results, we explore the degree to which this introduced azimuthal structure can affect the model accuracy. We construct input profiles using composite models using both the NFWp and NFWm methods and fit these mocks with a power-law elliptical mass distribution (PEMD) model with external shear. As a measure of the accuracy of the recovered lensing potential, we calculate the value of the Hubble parameter H<sub>0</sub> one would determine from the lensing fit. We find that the fits to the NFWp input return H<sub>0</sub> values which are systematically biased by about 3% lower than the NFWm counterparts. We explore whether such an effect is attributable to the mass sheet transformation (MST) by using an MST-independent quantity, ξ<sub>2</sub>. We show that, as expected, the NFWm mocks are degenerate with PEMD through an MST. For the NFWp, an additional bias is found beyond the MST due to azimuthal structures exterior to the Einstein radius. We recommend modelers use an NFWm prescription in the future, such that azimuthal structure can be introduced explicitly rather than implicitly.

### [COOLEST: the COde-independent Organized LEns STandard](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.05567)

Galan, Aymeric; Van de Vyvere, Lyne; **Gomer, Matthew R.**; Vernardos, Georgios; Sluse, Dominique, 2023

Extracting information from SGL data requires the careful analysis of images of gravitational lenses, a process referred to as lens modeling, in order to generate an image of the lens based on models of mass and light distributions of the different physical objects in play (e.g., galaxies, quasars). Over the past twenty years, several lens modeling codes have been developed and used in published works. Unfortunately, there is currently no efficient and systematic way to access these published results and use them directly for new studies, which slows down new research and causes a waste of research time. The reason is simple: these modeling codes being based on different methods and conventions, bridging the gap between them is a challenging task.

Here we introduce COOLEST—the COde-independent Organized LEnsing STandard—to the lensing community, which allows researchers to, independently of the original modeling code:
- store lens models in a JSON format that is lightweight and easy to read and manipulate;
- group together all necessary data, model and inference files (such as images and arrays
in standard FITS and pickle formats);
- compute a set of key lensing quantities, such as the effective Einstein radius and mass
density slope;
- compare models by generating standardized figures using a Python API.

### [Consequences of the lack of azimuthal freedom in the modeling of lensing galaxies](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022A%26A...663A.179V/abstract)

Van de Vyvere, Lyne; Sluse, Dominique; **Gomer, Matthew R.**; Mukherjee, Sampath, 2022

Massive elliptical galaxies can display structures that deviate from a pure elliptical shape, such as a twist of the principal axis or variations in the axis ratio with galactocentric distance. Although satisfactory lens modeling is generally achieved without accounting for these azimuthal structures, the question about their impact on inferred lens parameters remains, in particular, on time delays as they are used in time-delay cosmography. This paper aims at characterizing these effects and quantifying their impact considering realistic amplitudes of the variations. We achieved this goal by creating mock lensing galaxies with morphologies based on two data sets: observational data of local elliptical galaxies, and hydrodynamical simulations of elliptical galaxies at a typical lens redshift. We then simulated images of the lensing systems with space-based data quality and modeled them in a standard way to assess the impact of a lack of azimuthal freedom in the lens model. We find that twists in lensing galaxies are easily absorbed in homoeidal lens models by a change in orientation of the lens up to 10° with respect to the reference orientation at the Einstein radius, and of the shear by up to 20° with respect to the input shear orientation. The ellipticity gradients, on the other hand, can introduce a substantial amount of shear that may impact the radial mass model and consequently bias H<sub>0</sub>, up to 10 km s<sup>−1</sup> Mpc<sup>−1</sup>. However, we find that light is a good tracer of azimuthal structures, meaning that direct imaging should be capable of diagnosing their presence. This in turn implies that such a large bias is unlikely to be unaccounted for in standard modeling practices. Furthermore, the overall impact of twists and ellipticity gradients averages out at a population level. For the galaxy populations we considered, the cosmological inference remains unbiased.

### [TDCOSMO. VIII. A key test of systematics in the hierarchical method of time-delay cosmography](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022A%26A...667A..86G/abstract)

**Gomer, Matthew R.**; Sluse, Dominique; Van de Vyvere, Lyne; Birrer, Simon; Courbin, Frederic, 2022

The largest source of systematic errors in the time-delay cosmography method likely arises from the lens model mass distribution, where an inaccurate choice of model could in principle bias the value of H<sub>0</sub>. A Bayesian hierarchical framework has been proposed which combines lens systems with kinematic data, constraining the mass profile shape at a population level. The framework has been previously validated using a small sample of lensing galaxies drawn from hydro-simulations. The goal of this work is to expand the validation to a more general set of lenses consistent with observed systems, as well as confirm the capacity of the method to combine two lens populations: one which has time delay information and one which lacks time delays and has systematically different image radii. For this purpose, we generated samples of analytic lens mass distributions made of baryons+dark matter and fit the subsequent mock images with standard power-law models. Corresponding kinematics data were also emulated. The hierarchical framework applied to an ensemble of time-delay lenses allowed us to correct the H<sub>0</sub> bias associated with model choice to find H<sub>0</sub> within 1.5σ of the fiducial value. We then combined this set with a sample of corresponding lens systems which have no time delays and have a source at lower z, resulting in a systematically smaller image radius relative to their effective radius. The hierarchical framework has successfully accounted for this effect, recovering a value of H<sub>0</sub> which is both more precise (σ ∼ 2%) and more accurate (0.7% median offset) than the time-delay set alone. This result confirms that non-time-delay lenses can nonetheless contribute valuable constraining power to the determination of H<sub>0</sub> via their kinematic constraints, assuming they come from the same global population as the time-delay set.

### [TDCOSMO. VII. Boxyness/discyness in lensing galaxies: Detectability and impact on H<sub>0</sub>](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022A%26A...659A.127V/abstract)

Van de Vyvere, Lyne; **Gomer, Matthew R.**; Sluse, Dominique; Xu, Dandan; Birrer, Simon; Galan, Aymeric; Vernardos, Georgios, 2022

In the context of gravitational lensing, the density profile of lensing galaxies is often considered to be perfectly elliptical. Potential angular structures are generally ignored, except to explain flux ratios of point-like sources (i.e. flux ratio anomalies). Surprisingly, the impact of azimuthal structures on extended images of the source has not been characterised, nor has its impact on the H<sub>0</sub> inference. We address this task by creating mock images of a point source embedded in an extended source and lensed by an elliptical galaxy on which multipolar components are added to emulate boxy or discy isodensity contours. Modelling such images with a density profile free of angular structure allows us to explore the detectability of image deformation induced by the multipoles in the residual frame. Multipole deformations are almost always detectable for our highest signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) mock data. However, the detectability depends on the lens ellipticity and Einstein radius, on the S/N of the data, and on the specific lens modelling strategy. Multipoles also introduce small changes to the time-delays. We therefore quantify how undetected multipoles would impact H<sub>0</sub> inference. When no multipoles are detected in the residuals, the impact on H<sub>0</sub> for a given lens is in general less than a few km s<sup>−1</sup> Mpc<sup>−1</sup>, but in the worst-case scenario, combining low S/N in the ring and large intrinsic boxyness or discyness, the bias on H<sub>0</sub> can reach 10−12 km s<sup>−1</sup> Mpc<sup>−1</sup>. If we now look at the inference on H<sub>0</sub> from a population of lensing galaxies with a distribution of multipoles representative of what is found in the light profile of elliptical galaxies, we find a systematic bias on H<sub>0</sub> of less than 1%. A comparison of our mock systems to the state-of-the-art time-delay lens sample studied by the H0LiCOW and TDCOSMO collaborations indicates that multipoles are currently unlikely to be a source of substantial systematic bias on the inferred value of H<sub>0</sub> from time-delay lenses.

### [Galaxy-lens determination of H<sub>0</sub>: the effect of the ellipse + shear modelling assumption](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.504.1340G/abstract)

**Gomer, Matthew R.** and Williams, Liliya L. R., 2021

Galaxy lenses are frequently modelled as an elliptical mass distribution with external shear and isothermal spheres to account for secondary and line-of-sight galaxies. There is statistical evidence that some fraction of observed quads are inconsistent with these assumptions, and require a dipole-like contribution to the mass with respect to the light. Simplifying assumptions about the shape of mass distributions can lead to the incorrect recovery of parameters such as H<sub>0</sub>. We create several tests of synthetic quad populations with different deviations from an elliptical shape, then fit them with an ellipse + shear model, and measure the recovered values of H<sub>0</sub>. Kinematic constraints are not included. We perform two types of fittings - one with a single point source and one with an array of sources emulating an extended source. We carry out two model-free comparisons between our mock quads and the observed population. One result of these comparisons is a statistical inconsistency not yet mentioned in the literature: the image distance ratios with respect to the lens centre of observed quads appear to span a much wider range than those of synthetic or simulated quads. Bearing this discrepancy in mind, our mock populations can result in biases on H<sub>0</sub> ∼10 per cent.

### [Galaxy-lens determination of H<sub>0</sub>: constraining density slope in the context of the mass sheet degeneracy](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020JCAP...11..045G/abstract)

**Gomer, Matthew R.** and Williams, Liliya L. R., 2020

Gravitational lensing offers a competitive method to measure H<sub>0</sub> with the goal of 1% precision. A major obstacle comes in the form of lensing degeneracies, such as the mass sheet degeneracy (MSD), which make it possible for a family of density profiles to reproduce the same lensing observables but return different values of H<sub>0</sub>. The modeling process artificially selects one choice from this family, potentially biasing H<sub>0</sub>. The effect is more pronounced when the profile of a given lens is not perfectly described by the lens model, which will always be the case to some extent. To explore this, we quantify the bias and spread in H<sub>0</sub> by creating quads from two-component mass models and fitting them with a power-law ellipse+shear model. We find that the bias does not correspond to the estimate one would calculate by transforming the profile into a power law near the image radius. We also emulate the effect of including stellar kinematics by performing fits where the slope is constrained to the true value. Informing the fit using the true value near the image radius can introduce substantial bias (0-23% depending on the model). We confirm using Jeans arguments that kinematic constraints can result in a biased value of H<sub>0</sub>, though the degree of bias depends on the region kinematic modeling probes in specific lenses. We conclude that lensing degeneracies manifest through commonplace modeling approaches in a more complicated way than is assumed in the literature. If stellar kinematics incorrectly break the MSD, their inclusion may introduce more bias than their omission.

### [The impact of ΛCDM substructure and baryon-dark matter transition on the image positions of quad galaxy lenses](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018MNRAS.475.1987G/abstract)

**Gomer, Matthew R.** and Williams, Liliya L. R., 2018

The positions of multiple images in galaxy lenses are related to the galaxy mass distribution. Smooth elliptical mass profiles were previously shown to be inadequate in reproducing the quad population. In this paper, we explore the deviations from such smooth elliptical mass distributions. Unlike most other work, we use a model-free approach based on the relative polar image angles of quads, and their position in 3D space with respect to the fundamental surface of quads (FSQ). The FSQ is defined by quads produced by elliptical lenses. We have generated thousands of quads from synthetic populations of lenses with substructure consistent with Lambda cold dark matter (ΛCDM) simulations, and found that such perturbations are not sufficient to match the observed distribution of quads relative to the FSQ. The result is unchanged even when subhalo masses are increased by a factor of 10, and the most optimistic lensing selection bias is applied. We then produce quads from galaxies created using two components, representing baryons and dark matter. The transition from the mass being dominated by baryons in inner radii to being dominated by dark matter in outer radii can carry with it asymmetries, which would affect relative image angles. We run preliminary experiments using lenses with two elliptical mass components with non-identical axial ratios and position angles, perturbations from ellipticity in the form of non-zero Fourier coefficients a<sub>4</sub> and a<sub>6</sub>, and artificially offset ellipse centres as a proxy for asymmetry at image radii. We show that combination of these effects is a promising way of accounting for quad population properties. We conclude that the quad population provides a unique and sensitive tool for constraining detailed mass distribution in the centres of galaxies.
